---
layout: page
title: Individual Manifesto
---

## Ethics over Everything Else

Throughout the design process we have discussed ethics and ways in which technology can sometimes violate ethical standards. It is evident that the consideration of ethics both during the research and design process and in the final design of a product, is crucial. However, ethics should not be treated as an afterthought. The silicon valley motto, “move fast and break things” can lead to designers and programmers neglecting ethical concerns or potential ethics violations in order to engage in a rapid iteration process. Moreover, it is critical for programmers and designers to possess a strong personal code of ethics in regard to what they believe the boundaries and limitations of their product should be. The personal code of ethics that I have developed through this process is as follows:

**Designers should be transparent about the features of their product** 

A large number of ethics violations result from companies employing or possessing a feature that is hidden from users. The Uber Greyball is a perfect example of a hidden feature that Uber was able to exploit to avoid authorities in areas where Uber was banned. In the Strava case, the issue was a lack of clear information about the kind of data Strava collected about users in the “heat map” feature. Companies are able to get away with such ethics violations when they are not transparent about the features their product has or how it can be used. Therefore as a designer, I would make it a priority to be transparent about every critical feature, especially those that have the potential to be manipulated.

**Design flaws that pose ethical violations should be treated as top priority**

This means that when an issue is discovered that poses ethical concerns (for example in the cases of Strava or the Therac-25) they should be treated as the top priority. Rather than attempting to impose a “quick fix”, it is the designer/programmer’s duty to identify the root cause of the flaw, and implement a permanent solution. In some cases this may mean recalling and redesigning the product. This is what the primary issue was with the AECL’s Corrective Action Plan in response to the deaths caused by Therac-25: they treated it as an insignificant error to be “bandaged” instead of a severe problem that required, at minimum, rigorous testing prior to future use

**Do not cause harm**

This one is relatively self-explanatory. Designers should ensure that any features of their product are same from manipulation or use in a way that poses harm to others. This harm can be physical, emotional, or mental.

**Protection of Information is critical**

Users of a product should be confident that the information they are providing is secure. If that information is being used for other purposes (eg. research) the user has a right to know (and not in fine print). Companies should be clear and  upfront about how they use data. This is how we avoid scandals such as Cambridge Analytica. 

## "Solve for one, extend to the many" (Accessibility is for Everyone)

A key takeaway regarding accessibility is that ensuring that products are accessible is not necessarily about catering to disabled users, but about designing for the benefit of all users. The “curb-cut effect” as it is often called, pushes designers to “solve for one, extend to the many”. As such, accessibility should be a consideration in every stage of the design process. In my own work, I would be inclined to take the approach of the POUR methodology where in each stage of the design phase, we consider whether the content we are adding or designing is: perceivable, operable, understandable, and robust. I find these categories to be valuable because they encompass visual components, physical or interactive components, cognitive processing, and robustness. If a designer were to consider these four elements at each stage of the process, they would likely uncover potential barriers to accessibility prior to even adding a feature. Therefore, issues of accessibility can be addressed during the design process when there is a lower barrier to making modifications, rather than after the fact when barriers to adding or revamping features may be higher. 

Although we did not have the opportunity to consider accessibility in every stage of the design process, once we were aware of the ways that technology can be made accessible, we began to employ that in our process. For example, with our digital prototype, we carefully considered the color palette. [Add photo + description].

## The designer is not the user

This was probably the biggest takeaway from our design process. I began this process fairly confident that I understood “art amateurs”: after all, I had coined the term to describe people similar to myself. However, after only two contextual inquiries it became obvious that the group of “art amateurs” we were catering to was far more diverse that we had anticipated. Contrary to my expectation, for example, one of our contextual inquiry participants expressed being content with the fact that art museums were a space for people who cared about art, rather than being frustrated that museums were not more accessible to people of all backgrounds and interests.

Throughout our research process, the fact that the designer is not the user was reinforced. During our usability tests, we discovered that features we believed to be self-explanatory were not at all obvious to our users. In retrospect this is very reasonable: as designers of our product our mental models matched our expectations of how the design would be used. The users were not, however, guaranteed to share our same mental models, which is why the burden fell on us to ensure that the design matched the user’s mental model.

Understanding that I am not the user was a critical step toward being willing to make changes to our design that were contradictory to our original vision. This realization has also underscored the importance of design research. It would be easy enough to design a product that I **believe** would serve the user’s needs, but this process has taught me that what I **believe** the user needs may be entirely different than what the user actually needs. 

This also brings up the concern of identifying your user. In line with the concerns about ethics, it is equally important to understand not only how your product will affect the targeted users, but how it affects non-users. This is an understanding that must also be developed through the design process, since insofar as we are not the “user” we are also not the “non-user”.


## Simplicity over complexity

I was initially concerned that our final design was too simple; yet in our final usability tests it seemed like the simplicity was what appealed most to users. Initial iterations of our design contained a large amount of text. The final design uses more pictures and visualizations than text, which we discovered is preferable to users. Furthermore, what we discovered was that the  critical features that users desired were often simple features that increase the “usability” of the design: for example in our heuristic evaluation,  we discovered that in adding more complexity we had missed simple components like back buttons. It also became evident over the course of our design process that a reasonable amount of information could be conveyed with the use of minimal words. For example, based on the feedback from our initial designs, we chose to use colored emoticons as the principal feature of our design. This allowed us to convey a set of emotions without using emotions. It also removed the burden on the user to potentially have to input any words, thus reducing the effort barrier to using the design. Here we also relied on the principles of designing for small screens, specifically the suggestion that on a small screen it is often useful use “colour for coding”. Studio 75 advocates that “only a limited number of clearly distinguishable colours should be used in any one design; the colours should then be supplemented by an alternative form of identification such as an icon” (Studio 75). This allows for an effective and clear use of color that, again, makes understanding the design simple.

Providing the user with a simple mental model is the key to effective design. We discovered in one of our usability tests, that the relationship between the web-app component of our design, and the interactive display component, was entirely unclear to the user. The added complexity of having two components did not fit into the simple mental model the user had. This is not to say that complexity is bad; just that **when there are complex relationships between components, those relationships must be clear to the user.** In the case of the inability to connect the web app to the board, we added a button that displayed a map of the gallery, which would direct users to the nearest interactive display. 

Similarly, many of the features we added to the interactive display design involved simplifying the amount of cognition required on the part of the user. We added a finger icon to indicate that the user was meant to tap the screen, once again employing familiar icons that the user could easily incorporate into their mental model.

In future design project, I now know to err on the side of simplicity. While supporting a complex number and variety of tasks and features is always desirable, it is only valuable insofar as those features are clearly presented and easy to use. Simplicity is not necessarily about the _number_ of features a design whether the relationships between those features are _clear to the user_. Ultimately a simple design is one that requires little thought and effort to use and fits the simple mental model that the user is inclined to create.

## The first design is rarely the best design

The iterative design process was critical to achieving a final product that served our primary tasks in a clean and effective way. Our initial designs were highly “comment”-driven. We believed our primary task to be allowing users to share comments, and thus we had designed a product that was very similar to a discussion forum. It was only when we relinquinquished the idea of a comment-driven design, that we were able to consider other possibilities. This it was not till the second iteration that we began to consider using _emotion_ as the focal point of our design instead of comments. 

Through the iterative design process we not only modified our design, but we modified our preconceptions about what the purpose of our design was. In the second iteration of our design (the paper-prototype stage) we made the decision to present statistics in a way that **always** provided validation to the user. During one of our usability tests, we discovered that our participant did not necessarily want constant validation. They pointed out that this may lead to the design growing “boring” or “pointless” after multiple uses. This compelled us to modify the manner of displaying statistics so that we were providing the user with accuracy over pure validation.

The biggest takeaway from this process of rapid iteration is that **more iterations are always better.** Our design could undoubtedly have benefitted from more contextual inquiries, more usability tests and more prototype walkthroughs, especially given how much useful information we gleaned about our uears and our design in each one of these stages. As a designer moving forward, I am inclined to prefer more iterations and more user-based tests at every stage. A larger sample of users can only benefit the improvement of the design. At the end of the day, two users can not, and should not, speak for an entire population of users. The first design is not the best design because regardless of how good a design is, **it can almost always be better.**
